HW2_jpv2129.md, before:

Homework 2
================
Jake Vettoretti
2025-09-26

## Problem 1

Installing and cleaning pols data.

``` r
pols_df = read_csv("data/pols-month.csv") |> #Clean pols.csv data
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  separate(mon, into = c("year", "month", "day"), sep = "-", convert = TRUE) |> 
  mutate(
    month = month.name[as.numeric(month)],
    president = case_when(
      prez_gop == 1 ~ "gop",
      prez_dem == 1 ~ "dem",
      TRUE ~ NA_character_
    )
  ) |> 
  select(-prez_dem, -prez_gop, -day) |> 
  arrange(year, month)
```

    ## Rows: 822 Columns: 9
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## dbl  (8): prez_gop, gov_gop, sen_gop, rep_gop, prez_dem, gov_dem, sen_dem, r...
    ## date (1): mon
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

``` r
pols_df
```

    ## # A tibble: 822 × 9
    ##     year month    gov_gop sen_gop rep_gop gov_dem sen_dem rep_dem president
    ##    <int> <chr>      <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl> <chr>    
    ##  1  1947 April         23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ##  2  1947 August        23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ##  3  1947 December      24      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ##  4  1947 February      23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ##  5  1947 January       23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ##  6  1947 July          23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ##  7  1947 June          23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ##  8  1947 March         23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ##  9  1947 May           23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ## 10  1947 November      24      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ## # ℹ 812 more rows

Installing and cleaning snp data.

``` r
snp_df = read_csv("data/snp.csv") |>  # Clean snp.csv data
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  mutate(
    date = as.Date(date, format = "%m/%d/%y"),
    year = as.integer(ifelse(
      format(date, "%y") <= "68", 
      paste0("20", format(date, "%y")),
      paste0("19", format(date, "%y"))
    )),
    month = month.name[as.integer(format(date, "%m"))]
  ) |>
  select(year, month, close) |>
  arrange(year, month)
```

    ## Rows: 787 Columns: 2
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## chr (1): date
    ## dbl (1): close
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

``` r
snp_df
```

    ## # A tibble: 787 × 3
    ##     year month    close
    ##    <int> <chr>    <dbl>
    ##  1  1969 April    104. 
    ##  2  1969 August    95.5
    ##  3  1969 December  92.1
    ##  4  1969 February  98.1
    ##  5  1969 January  103. 
    ##  6  1969 July      91.8
    ##  7  1969 June      97.7
    ##  8  1969 March    102. 
    ##  9  1969 May      103. 
    ## 10  1969 November  93.8
    ## # ℹ 777 more rows

Preparing datasets for merge.

``` r
unemployment_df = read_csv("data/unemployment.csv") |> 
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  pivot_longer(
    cols = jan:dec,
    names_to = "month_abbr",
    values_to = "unemployment_rate"
  ) |> 
  # Convert abbreviations using month.name and month.abb constants
  mutate(month = month.name[match(month_abbr, tolower(month.abb))]) |> 
  select(-month_abbr) |> 
  rename(year = year) |> 
  arrange(year, month)
```

    ## Rows: 68 Columns: 13
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## dbl (13): Year, Jan, Feb, Mar, Apr, May, Jun, Jul, Aug, Sep, Oct, Nov, Dec
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

Merging the data sets

``` r
merged_data = pols_df |> #merging pols and snp to prepare for merge into unemployment
  left_join(snp_df, by = c("year", "month"))

final_data = merged_data |>  # Step 2: Merge unemployment into the result  
  left_join(unemployment_df, by = c("year", "month"))

final_data
```

    ## # A tibble: 822 × 11
    ##     year month   gov_gop sen_gop rep_gop gov_dem sen_dem rep_dem president close
    ##    <dbl> <chr>     <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl> <chr>     <dbl>
    ##  1  1947 April        23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ##  2  1947 August       23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ##  3  1947 Decemb…      24      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ##  4  1947 Februa…      23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ##  5  1947 January      23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ##  6  1947 July         23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ##  7  1947 June         23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ##  8  1947 March        23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ##  9  1947 May          23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ## 10  1947 Novemb…      24      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ## # ℹ 812 more rows
    ## # ℹ 1 more variable: unemployment_rate <dbl>

Write a short paragraph about these datasets. Explain briefly what each
dataset contained, and describe the resulting dataset (e.g. give the
dimension, range of years, and names of key variables):

## Problem 2

Importing and cleaning the Mr. Trash Wheel Data

``` r
# Mr. Trash Wheel
mr_trash_wheel = read_excel("data/trashwheeldatanew.xlsx", 
  sheet = "Mr. Trash Wheel", skip = 1, na = c("NA", ".", "")) %>%  # Skip the first row (metadata/header),
  janitor:: clean_names() |>  # Clean column names and remove rows that don't have dumpster data (NA in dumpster column)
  filter(!is.na(dumpster))|>
  mutate(sports_balls = as.integer(round(sports_balls))) |> 
  select(dumpster:homes_powered)   # Select only the relevant columns with dumpster-specific data
```

    ## New names:
    ## • `` -> `...15`
    ## • `` -> `...16`

``` r
mr_trash_wheel
```

    ## # A tibble: 707 × 14
    ##    dumpster month year  date                weight_tons volume_cubic_yards
    ##       <dbl> <chr> <chr> <dttm>                    <dbl>              <dbl>
    ##  1        1 May   2014  2014-05-16 00:00:00        4.31                 18
    ##  2        2 May   2014  2014-05-16 00:00:00        2.74                 13
    ##  3        3 May   2014  2014-05-16 00:00:00        3.45                 15
    ##  4        4 May   2014  2014-05-17 00:00:00        3.1                  15
    ##  5        5 May   2014  2014-05-17 00:00:00        4.06                 18
    ##  6        6 May   2014  2014-05-20 00:00:00        2.71                 13
    ##  7        7 May   2014  2014-05-21 00:00:00        1.91                  8
    ##  8        8 May   2014  2014-05-28 00:00:00        3.7                  16
    ##  9        9 June  2014  2014-06-05 00:00:00        2.52                 14
    ## 10       10 June  2014  2014-06-11 00:00:00        3.76                 18
    ## # ℹ 697 more rows
    ## # ℹ 8 more variables: plastic_bottles <dbl>, polystyrene <dbl>,
    ## #   cigarette_butts <dbl>, glass_bottles <dbl>, plastic_bags <dbl>,
    ## #   wrappers <dbl>, sports_balls <int>, homes_powered <dbl>

``` r
# Professor Trash Wheel - same process with consistent data types
professor_trash_wheel = read_excel("data/trashwheeldatanew.xlsx", 
  sheet = "Professor Trash Wheel", skip = 1, na = c("NA", ".", "")) %>%  
  janitor::clean_names() |>  
  filter(!is.na(dumpster))|>
  # Ensure consistent data types
  mutate(
    year = as.character(year)  # Convert to character to match Mr. Trash Wheel
  ) |>
  select(dumpster:homes_powered)

# Gwynnda Trash Wheel - same process with consistent data types
gwynns_trash_wheel = read_excel("data/trashwheeldatanew.xlsx", 
  sheet = "Gwynns Falls Trash Wheel", skip = 1, na = c("NA", ".", "")) %>%  
  janitor::clean_names() |>  
  filter(!is.na(dumpster))|>
  # Ensure consistent data types
  mutate(
    year = as.character(year)  # Convert to character to match Mr. Trash Wheel
  ) |>
  select(dumpster:homes_powered)

# Add identifier variable to each dataset
mr_trash_wheel = mr_trash_wheel |> 
  mutate(trash_wheel = "Mr. Trash Wheel")

professor_trash_wheel = professor_trash_wheel |> 
  mutate(trash_wheel = "Professor Trash Wheel")

gwynns_trash_wheel = gwynns_trash_wheel |> 
  mutate(trash_wheel = "Gwynns Falls Trash Wheel")

all_trash_wheels = mr_trash_wheel |> 
  full_join(professor_trash_wheel) |> 
  full_join(gwynns_trash_wheel) |> 
  select(trash_wheel, everything())  # Move identifier to first column
```

    ## Joining with `by = join_by(dumpster, month, year, date, weight_tons,
    ## volume_cubic_yards, plastic_bottles, polystyrene, cigarette_butts,
    ## glass_bottles, plastic_bags, wrappers, homes_powered, trash_wheel)`
    ## Joining with `by = join_by(dumpster, month, year, date, weight_tons,
    ## volume_cubic_yards, plastic_bottles, polystyrene, cigarette_butts,
    ## plastic_bags, wrappers, homes_powered, trash_wheel)`

``` r
# View the combined tidy dataset
all_trash_wheels
```

    ## # A tibble: 1,188 × 15
    ##    trash_wheel     dumpster month year  date                weight_tons
    ##    <chr>              <dbl> <chr> <chr> <dttm>                    <dbl>
    ##  1 Mr. Trash Wheel        1 May   2014  2014-05-16 00:00:00        4.31
    ##  2 Mr. Trash Wheel        2 May   2014  2014-05-16 00:00:00        2.74
    ##  3 Mr. Trash Wheel        3 May   2014  2014-05-16 00:00:00        3.45
    ##  4 Mr. Trash Wheel        4 May   2014  2014-05-17 00:00:00        3.1 
    ##  5 Mr. Trash Wheel        5 May   2014  2014-05-17 00:00:00        4.06
    ##  6 Mr. Trash Wheel        6 May   2014  2014-05-20 00:00:00        2.71
    ##  7 Mr. Trash Wheel        7 May   2014  2014-05-21 00:00:00        1.91
    ##  8 Mr. Trash Wheel        8 May   2014  2014-05-28 00:00:00        3.7 
    ##  9 Mr. Trash Wheel        9 June  2014  2014-06-05 00:00:00        2.52
    ## 10 Mr. Trash Wheel       10 June  2014  2014-06-11 00:00:00        3.76
    ## # ℹ 1,178 more rows
    ## # ℹ 9 more variables: volume_cubic_yards <dbl>, plastic_bottles <dbl>,
    ## #   polystyrene <dbl>, cigarette_butts <dbl>, glass_bottles <dbl>,
    ## #   plastic_bags <dbl>, wrappers <dbl>, sports_balls <int>, homes_powered <dbl>

``` r
view(all_trash_wheels)

#Calculations requested for trash tons total and cigarette butts for June 2022
professor_total_weight <- all_trash_wheels |> 
  filter(trash_wheel == "Professor Trash Wheel") |> 
  summarise(total_weight_tons = sum(weight_tons, na.rm = TRUE))

gwynns_june_2022_butts <- all_trash_wheels |> 
  filter(trash_wheel == "Gwynns Falls Trash Wheel",
         year == "2022",
         month == "June") |> 
  summarise(total_cigarette_butts = sum(cigarette_butts, na.rm = TRUE))

# Display results
cat("Total weight of trash collected by Professor Trash Wheel:\n")
```

    ## Total weight of trash collected by Professor Trash Wheel:

``` r
print(professor_total_weight)
```

    ## # A tibble: 1 × 1
    ##   total_weight_tons
    ##               <dbl>
    ## 1              282.

``` r
cat("\nTotal number of cigarette butts collected by Gwynns in June 2022:\n")
```

    ## 
    ## Total number of cigarette butts collected by Gwynns in June 2022:

``` r
print(gwynns_june_2022_butts)
```

    ## # A tibble: 1 × 1
    ##   total_cigarette_butts
    ##                   <dbl>
    ## 1                 18120

Write a paragraph about these data; you are encouraged to use inline R.
Be sure to note the number of observations in the resulting dataset, and
give examples of key variables. For available data, what was the total
weight of trash collected by Professor Trash Wheel? 282 tons. What was
the total number of cigarette butts collected by Gwynnda in June of
2022? 18,120 cigarette butts.

## Problem 3

``` r
zipcodes_df = read_csv("data/zillowdata/zipcodes.csv", na = c("NA", ".", "")) |>  
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  select(
    -file_date,
    -county  # Remove county from zipcodes_df to avoid duplication
  )
```

    ## Rows: 322 Columns: 7
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## chr (4): County, County Code, File Date, Neighborhood
    ## dbl (3): State FIPS, County FIPS, ZipCode
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

``` r
zori_df = read_csv("data/zillowdata/zipzori.csv", na = c("NA", ".", "")) |>  
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  pivot_longer(
    cols = starts_with("x20"),
    names_to = "date",
    values_to = "zillow_value"
  ) |> 
  mutate(
    date = format(ymd(gsub("x", "", date)), "%m/%d/%y")
  ) |> 
  select(
    zip_code = region_name,
    county = county_name,
    date,
    zillow_value,
    -region_id, -size_rank, -region_type, -state_name
  )
```

    ## Rows: 149 Columns: 125
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## chr   (6): RegionType, StateName, State, City, Metro, CountyName
    ## dbl (119): RegionID, SizeRank, RegionName, 2015-01-31, 2015-02-28, 2015-03-3...
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

``` r
tidy_df <- zori_df |> 
  left_join(zipcodes_df, by = "zip_code") 
```

    ## Warning in left_join(zori_df, zipcodes_df, by = "zip_code"): Detected an unexpected many-to-many relationship between `x` and `y`.
    ## ℹ Row 4757 of `x` matches multiple rows in `y`.
    ## ℹ Row 256 of `y` matches multiple rows in `x`.
    ## ℹ If a many-to-many relationship is expected, set `relationship =
    ##   "many-to-many"` to silence this warning.

``` r
tidy_df <- tidy_df |> 
  mutate(
    borough = case_when(
      county == "New York County" ~ "Manhattan",
      county == "Kings County" ~ "Brooklyn", 
      county == "Queens County" ~ "Queens",
      county == "Bronx County" ~ "Bronx",
      county == "Richmond County" ~ "Staten Island",
      # Handle variations in county naming
      str_detect(tolower(county), "new york") ~ "Manhattan",
      str_detect(tolower(county), "kings") ~ "Brooklyn",
      str_detect(tolower(county), "queens") ~ "Queens", 
      str_detect(tolower(county), "bronx") ~ "Bronx",
      str_detect(tolower(county), "richmond") ~ "Staten Island",
      TRUE ~ "Other"  # For non-NYC counties
    )
  )
# First, create the borough column from county
tidy_df <- tidy_df %>%
  mutate(
    borough = case_when(
      str_detect(county, "New York") ~ "Manhattan",
      str_detect(county, "Kings") ~ "Brooklyn",
      str_detect(county, "Queens") ~ "Queens",
      str_detect(county, "Bronx") ~ "Bronx",
      str_detect(county, "Richmond") ~ "Staten Island",
      TRUE ~ "Other NYC Area"
    )
  )
view(tidy_df)
nrow(tidy_df)
```

    ## [1] 17516

``` r
dim(tidy_df)
```

    ## [1] 17516     9

``` r
#Creating table to find 10 biggest price drops with county and neighborhood
top_drops <- tidy_df %>%
  mutate(borough = case_when(
    str_detect(county, "New York") ~ "Manhattan",
    str_detect(county, "Kings") ~ "Brooklyn",
    str_detect(county, "Queens") ~ "Queens",
    str_detect(county, "Bronx") ~ "Bronx", 
    str_detect(county, "Richmond") ~ "Staten Island",
    TRUE ~ "Other NYC Area"
  )) %>%
  filter(date %in% c("01/31/20", "01/31/21")) %>%
  group_by(zip_code) %>% filter(n() == 2) %>%
  pivot_wider(names_from = date, values_from = zillow_value) %>%
  mutate(
    price_drop = `01/31/21` - `01/31/20`,
    percent_drop = ((`01/31/21` - `01/31/20`) / `01/31/20`) * 100
  ) %>%
  ungroup() %>% drop_na() %>%
  slice_min(price_drop, n = 10) %>%
  select(zip_code, borough, neighborhood, jan_2020 = `01/31/20`, jan_2021 = `01/31/21`, price_drop, percent_drop) %>%
  mutate(across(where(is.numeric), round, 2))
```

    ## Warning: There was 1 warning in `mutate()`.
    ## ℹ In argument: `across(where(is.numeric), round, 2)`.
    ## Caused by warning:
    ## ! The `...` argument of `across()` is deprecated as of dplyr 1.1.0.
    ## Supply arguments directly to `.fns` through an anonymous function instead.
    ## 
    ##   # Previously
    ##   across(a:b, mean, na.rm = TRUE)
    ## 
    ##   # Now
    ##   across(a:b, \(x) mean(x, na.rm = TRUE))

``` r
kable(top_drops)
```

| zip_code | borough | neighborhood | jan_2020 | jan_2021 | price_drop | percent_drop |
|---:|:---|:---|---:|---:|---:|---:|
| 10007 | Manhattan | Lower Manhattan | 6334.21 | 5421.61 | -912.60 | -14.41 |
| 10009 | Manhattan | Lower East Side | 3406.44 | 2692.19 | -714.25 | -20.97 |
| 10016 | Manhattan | Gramercy Park and Murray Hill | 3731.14 | 3019.43 | -711.70 | -19.07 |
| 10001 | Manhattan | Chelsea and Clinton | 4108.10 | 3397.65 | -710.45 | -17.29 |
| 10002 | Manhattan | Lower East Side | 3645.42 | 2935.11 | -710.30 | -19.48 |
| 10004 | Manhattan | Lower Manhattan | 3149.66 | 2443.70 | -705.96 | -22.41 |
| 10038 | Manhattan | Lower Manhattan | 3573.20 | 2875.62 | -697.59 | -19.52 |
| 10012 | Manhattan | Greenwich Village and Soho | 3628.57 | 2942.34 | -686.22 | -18.91 |
| 10010 | Manhattan | Gramercy Park and Murray Hill | 3697.28 | 3012.35 | -684.93 | -18.53 |
| 10003 | Manhattan | Lower East Side | 3569.78 | 2897.24 | -672.54 | -18.84 |

Commit message:

Finding more info about zip codes

HW2_jpv2129.md, after:

Homework 2
================
Jake Vettoretti
2025-09-26

## Problem 1

Installing and cleaning pols data.

``` r
pols_df = read_csv("data/pols-month.csv") |> #Clean pols.csv data
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  separate(mon, into = c("year", "month", "day"), sep = "-", convert = TRUE) |> 
  mutate(
    month = month.name[as.numeric(month)],
    president = case_when(
      prez_gop == 1 ~ "gop",
      prez_dem == 1 ~ "dem",
      TRUE ~ NA_character_
    )
  ) |> 
  select(-prez_dem, -prez_gop, -day) |> 
  arrange(year, month)
```

    ## Rows: 822 Columns: 9
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## dbl  (8): prez_gop, gov_gop, sen_gop, rep_gop, prez_dem, gov_dem, sen_dem, r...
    ## date (1): mon
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

``` r
pols_df
```

    ## # A tibble: 822 × 9
    ##     year month    gov_gop sen_gop rep_gop gov_dem sen_dem rep_dem president
    ##    <int> <chr>      <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl> <chr>    
    ##  1  1947 April         23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ##  2  1947 August        23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ##  3  1947 December      24      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ##  4  1947 February      23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ##  5  1947 January       23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ##  6  1947 July          23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ##  7  1947 June          23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ##  8  1947 March         23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ##  9  1947 May           23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ## 10  1947 November      24      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ## # ℹ 812 more rows

Installing and cleaning snp data.

``` r
snp_df = read_csv("data/snp.csv") |>  # Clean snp.csv data
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  mutate(
    date = as.Date(date, format = "%m/%d/%y"),
    year = as.integer(ifelse(
      format(date, "%y") <= "68", 
      paste0("20", format(date, "%y")),
      paste0("19", format(date, "%y"))
    )),
    month = month.name[as.integer(format(date, "%m"))]
  ) |>
  select(year, month, close) |>
  arrange(year, month)
```

    ## Rows: 787 Columns: 2
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## chr (1): date
    ## dbl (1): close
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

``` r
snp_df
```

    ## # A tibble: 787 × 3
    ##     year month    close
    ##    <int> <chr>    <dbl>
    ##  1  1969 April    104. 
    ##  2  1969 August    95.5
    ##  3  1969 December  92.1
    ##  4  1969 February  98.1
    ##  5  1969 January  103. 
    ##  6  1969 July      91.8
    ##  7  1969 June      97.7
    ##  8  1969 March    102. 
    ##  9  1969 May      103. 
    ## 10  1969 November  93.8
    ## # ℹ 777 more rows

Preparing datasets for merge.

``` r
unemployment_df = read_csv("data/unemployment.csv") |> 
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  pivot_longer(
    cols = jan:dec,
    names_to = "month_abbr",
    values_to = "unemployment_rate"
  ) |> 
  # Convert abbreviations using month.name and month.abb constants
  mutate(month = month.name[match(month_abbr, tolower(month.abb))]) |> 
  select(-month_abbr) |> 
  rename(year = year) |> 
  arrange(year, month)
```

    ## Rows: 68 Columns: 13
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## dbl (13): Year, Jan, Feb, Mar, Apr, May, Jun, Jul, Aug, Sep, Oct, Nov, Dec
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

Merging the data sets

``` r
merged_data = pols_df |> #merging pols and snp to prepare for merge into unemployment
  left_join(snp_df, by = c("year", "month"))

final_data = merged_data |>  # Step 2: Merge unemployment into the result  
  left_join(unemployment_df, by = c("year", "month"))

final_data
```

    ## # A tibble: 822 × 11
    ##     year month   gov_gop sen_gop rep_gop gov_dem sen_dem rep_dem president close
    ##    <dbl> <chr>     <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl> <chr>     <dbl>
    ##  1  1947 April        23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ##  2  1947 August       23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ##  3  1947 Decemb…      24      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ##  4  1947 Februa…      23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ##  5  1947 January      23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ##  6  1947 July         23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ##  7  1947 June         23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ##  8  1947 March        23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ##  9  1947 May          23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ## 10  1947 Novemb…      24      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ## # ℹ 812 more rows
    ## # ℹ 1 more variable: unemployment_rate <dbl>

Write a short paragraph about these datasets. Explain briefly what each
dataset contained, and describe the resulting dataset (e.g. give the
dimension, range of years, and names of key variables):

## Problem 2

Importing and cleaning the Mr. Trash Wheel Data

``` r
# Mr. Trash Wheel
mr_trash_wheel = read_excel("data/trashwheeldatanew.xlsx", 
  sheet = "Mr. Trash Wheel", skip = 1, na = c("NA", ".", "")) %>%  # Skip the first row (metadata/header),
  janitor:: clean_names() |>  # Clean column names and remove rows that don't have dumpster data (NA in dumpster column)
  filter(!is.na(dumpster))|>
  mutate(sports_balls = as.integer(round(sports_balls))) |> 
  select(dumpster:homes_powered)   # Select only the relevant columns with dumpster-specific data
```

    ## New names:
    ## • `` -> `...15`
    ## • `` -> `...16`

``` r
mr_trash_wheel
```

    ## # A tibble: 707 × 14
    ##    dumpster month year  date                weight_tons volume_cubic_yards
    ##       <dbl> <chr> <chr> <dttm>                    <dbl>              <dbl>
    ##  1        1 May   2014  2014-05-16 00:00:00        4.31                 18
    ##  2        2 May   2014  2014-05-16 00:00:00        2.74                 13
    ##  3        3 May   2014  2014-05-16 00:00:00        3.45                 15
    ##  4        4 May   2014  2014-05-17 00:00:00        3.1                  15
    ##  5        5 May   2014  2014-05-17 00:00:00        4.06                 18
    ##  6        6 May   2014  2014-05-20 00:00:00        2.71                 13
    ##  7        7 May   2014  2014-05-21 00:00:00        1.91                  8
    ##  8        8 May   2014  2014-05-28 00:00:00        3.7                  16
    ##  9        9 June  2014  2014-06-05 00:00:00        2.52                 14
    ## 10       10 June  2014  2014-06-11 00:00:00        3.76                 18
    ## # ℹ 697 more rows
    ## # ℹ 8 more variables: plastic_bottles <dbl>, polystyrene <dbl>,
    ## #   cigarette_butts <dbl>, glass_bottles <dbl>, plastic_bags <dbl>,
    ## #   wrappers <dbl>, sports_balls <int>, homes_powered <dbl>

``` r
# Professor Trash Wheel - same process with consistent data types
professor_trash_wheel = read_excel("data/trashwheeldatanew.xlsx", 
  sheet = "Professor Trash Wheel", skip = 1, na = c("NA", ".", "")) %>%  
  janitor::clean_names() |>  
  filter(!is.na(dumpster))|>
  # Ensure consistent data types
  mutate(
    year = as.character(year)  # Convert to character to match Mr. Trash Wheel
  ) |>
  select(dumpster:homes_powered)

# Gwynnda Trash Wheel - same process with consistent data types
gwynns_trash_wheel = read_excel("data/trashwheeldatanew.xlsx", 
  sheet = "Gwynns Falls Trash Wheel", skip = 1, na = c("NA", ".", "")) %>%  
  janitor::clean_names() |>  
  filter(!is.na(dumpster))|>
  # Ensure consistent data types
  mutate(
    year = as.character(year)  # Convert to character to match Mr. Trash Wheel
  ) |>
  select(dumpster:homes_powered)

# Add identifier variable to each dataset
mr_trash_wheel = mr_trash_wheel |> 
  mutate(trash_wheel = "Mr. Trash Wheel")

professor_trash_wheel = professor_trash_wheel |> 
  mutate(trash_wheel = "Professor Trash Wheel")

gwynns_trash_wheel = gwynns_trash_wheel |> 
  mutate(trash_wheel = "Gwynns Falls Trash Wheel")

all_trash_wheels = mr_trash_wheel |> 
  full_join(professor_trash_wheel) |> 
  full_join(gwynns_trash_wheel) |> 
  select(trash_wheel, everything())  # Move identifier to first column
```

    ## Joining with `by = join_by(dumpster, month, year, date, weight_tons,
    ## volume_cubic_yards, plastic_bottles, polystyrene, cigarette_butts,
    ## glass_bottles, plastic_bags, wrappers, homes_powered, trash_wheel)`
    ## Joining with `by = join_by(dumpster, month, year, date, weight_tons,
    ## volume_cubic_yards, plastic_bottles, polystyrene, cigarette_butts,
    ## plastic_bags, wrappers, homes_powered, trash_wheel)`

``` r
# View the combined tidy dataset
all_trash_wheels
```

    ## # A tibble: 1,188 × 15
    ##    trash_wheel     dumpster month year  date                weight_tons
    ##    <chr>              <dbl> <chr> <chr> <dttm>                    <dbl>
    ##  1 Mr. Trash Wheel        1 May   2014  2014-05-16 00:00:00        4.31
    ##  2 Mr. Trash Wheel        2 May   2014  2014-05-16 00:00:00        2.74
    ##  3 Mr. Trash Wheel        3 May   2014  2014-05-16 00:00:00        3.45
    ##  4 Mr. Trash Wheel        4 May   2014  2014-05-17 00:00:00        3.1 
    ##  5 Mr. Trash Wheel        5 May   2014  2014-05-17 00:00:00        4.06
    ##  6 Mr. Trash Wheel        6 May   2014  2014-05-20 00:00:00        2.71
    ##  7 Mr. Trash Wheel        7 May   2014  2014-05-21 00:00:00        1.91
    ##  8 Mr. Trash Wheel        8 May   2014  2014-05-28 00:00:00        3.7 
    ##  9 Mr. Trash Wheel        9 June  2014  2014-06-05 00:00:00        2.52
    ## 10 Mr. Trash Wheel       10 June  2014  2014-06-11 00:00:00        3.76
    ## # ℹ 1,178 more rows
    ## # ℹ 9 more variables: volume_cubic_yards <dbl>, plastic_bottles <dbl>,
    ## #   polystyrene <dbl>, cigarette_butts <dbl>, glass_bottles <dbl>,
    ## #   plastic_bags <dbl>, wrappers <dbl>, sports_balls <int>, homes_powered <dbl>

``` r
view(all_trash_wheels)

#Calculations requested for trash tons total and cigarette butts for June 2022
professor_total_weight <- all_trash_wheels |> 
  filter(trash_wheel == "Professor Trash Wheel") |> 
  summarise(total_weight_tons = sum(weight_tons, na.rm = TRUE))

gwynns_june_2022_butts <- all_trash_wheels |> 
  filter(trash_wheel == "Gwynns Falls Trash Wheel",
         year == "2022",
         month == "June") |> 
  summarise(total_cigarette_butts = sum(cigarette_butts, na.rm = TRUE))

# Display results
cat("Total weight of trash collected by Professor Trash Wheel:\n")
```

    ## Total weight of trash collected by Professor Trash Wheel:

``` r
print(professor_total_weight)
```

    ## # A tibble: 1 × 1
    ##   total_weight_tons
    ##               <dbl>
    ## 1              282.

``` r
cat("\nTotal number of cigarette butts collected by Gwynns in June 2022:\n")
```

    ## 
    ## Total number of cigarette butts collected by Gwynns in June 2022:

``` r
print(gwynns_june_2022_butts)
```

    ## # A tibble: 1 × 1
    ##   total_cigarette_butts
    ##                   <dbl>
    ## 1                 18120

Write a paragraph about these data; you are encouraged to use inline R.
Be sure to note the number of observations in the resulting dataset, and
give examples of key variables. For available data, what was the total
weight of trash collected by Professor Trash Wheel? 282 tons. What was
the total number of cigarette butts collected by Gwynnda in June of
2022? 18,120 cigarette butts.

## Problem 3

``` r
zipcodes_df = read_csv("data/zillowdata/zipcodes.csv", na = c("NA", ".", "")) |>  
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  select(
    -file_date,
    -county
  )
```

    ## Rows: 322 Columns: 7
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## chr (4): County, County Code, File Date, Neighborhood
    ## dbl (3): State FIPS, County FIPS, ZipCode
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

``` r
zori_df = read_csv("data/zillowdata/zipzori.csv", na = c("NA", ".", "")) |>  
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  pivot_longer(
    cols = starts_with("x20"),
    names_to = "date",
    values_to = "zillow_value"
  ) |> 
  mutate(
    date = format(ymd(gsub("x", "", date)), "%m/%d/%y")
  ) |> 
  select(
    zip_code = region_name,
    county = county_name,
    date,
    zillow_value,
    -region_id, -size_rank, -region_type, -state_name
  )
```

    ## Rows: 149 Columns: 125
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## chr   (6): RegionType, StateName, State, City, Metro, CountyName
    ## dbl (119): RegionID, SizeRank, RegionName, 2015-01-31, 2015-02-28, 2015-03-3...
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

``` r
tidy_df <- zori_df |> 
  left_join(zipcodes_df, by = "zip_code") 
```

    ## Warning in left_join(zori_df, zipcodes_df, by = "zip_code"): Detected an unexpected many-to-many relationship between `x` and `y`.
    ## ℹ Row 4757 of `x` matches multiple rows in `y`.
    ## ℹ Row 256 of `y` matches multiple rows in `x`.
    ## ℹ If a many-to-many relationship is expected, set `relationship =
    ##   "many-to-many"` to silence this warning.

``` r
tidy_df <- tidy_df |> 
  mutate(
    borough = case_when(
      county == "New York County" ~ "Manhattan",
      county == "Kings County" ~ "Brooklyn", 
      county == "Queens County" ~ "Queens",
      county == "Bronx County" ~ "Bronx",
      county == "Richmond County" ~ "Staten Island",
      # Handle variations in county naming
      str_detect(tolower(county), "new york") ~ "Manhattan",
      str_detect(tolower(county), "kings") ~ "Brooklyn",
      str_detect(tolower(county), "queens") ~ "Queens", 
      str_detect(tolower(county), "bronx") ~ "Bronx",
      str_detect(tolower(county), "richmond") ~ "Staten Island",
      TRUE ~ "Other"  # For non-NYC counties
    )
  )
# First, create the borough column from county
tidy_df <- tidy_df %>%
  mutate(
    borough = case_when(
      str_detect(county, "New York") ~ "Manhattan",
      str_detect(county, "Kings") ~ "Brooklyn",
      str_detect(county, "Queens") ~ "Queens",
      str_detect(county, "Bronx") ~ "Bronx",
      str_detect(county, "Richmond") ~ "Staten Island",
      TRUE ~ "Other NYC Area"
    )
  )
view(tidy_df)
nrow(tidy_df)
```

    ## [1] 17516

``` r
dim(tidy_df)
```

    ## [1] 17516     9

``` r
# Check unique ZIP codes and neighborhoods
cat("Number of unique ZIP codes:", n_distinct(tidy_df$zip_code), "\n")
```

    ## Number of unique ZIP codes: 149

``` r
cat("Number of unique neighborhoods:", n_distinct(tidy_df$neighborhood), "\n")
```

    ## Number of unique neighborhoods: 43

``` r
# Find ZIP codes in zipcodes_df but not in zori_df
missing_zips <- zipcodes_df %>%
  anti_join(zori_df, by = "zip_code") %>%
  select(zip_code) %>%
  distinct()

cat("Number of ZIP codes in ZIP code dataset but not in Zillow dataset:", nrow(missing_zips), "\n")
```

    ## Number of ZIP codes in ZIP code dataset but not in Zillow dataset: 171

``` r
#Creating table to find 10 biggest price drops with county and neighborhood
top_drops <- tidy_df %>%
  mutate(borough = case_when(
    str_detect(county, "New York") ~ "Manhattan",
    str_detect(county, "Kings") ~ "Brooklyn",
    str_detect(county, "Queens") ~ "Queens",
    str_detect(county, "Bronx") ~ "Bronx", 
    str_detect(county, "Richmond") ~ "Staten Island",
    TRUE ~ "Other NYC Area"
  )) %>%
  filter(date %in% c("01/31/20", "01/31/21")) %>%
  group_by(zip_code) %>% filter(n() == 2) %>%
  pivot_wider(names_from = date, values_from = zillow_value) %>%
  mutate(
    price_drop = `01/31/21` - `01/31/20`,
    percent_drop = ((`01/31/21` - `01/31/20`) / `01/31/20`) * 100
  ) %>%
  ungroup() %>% drop_na() %>%
  slice_min(price_drop, n = 10) %>%
  select(zip_code, borough, neighborhood, jan_2020 = `01/31/20`, jan_2021 = `01/31/21`, price_drop, percent_drop) %>%
  mutate(across(where(is.numeric), round, 2))
```

    ## Warning: There was 1 warning in `mutate()`.
    ## ℹ In argument: `across(where(is.numeric), round, 2)`.
    ## Caused by warning:
    ## ! The `...` argument of `across()` is deprecated as of dplyr 1.1.0.
    ## Supply arguments directly to `.fns` through an anonymous function instead.
    ## 
    ##   # Previously
    ##   across(a:b, mean, na.rm = TRUE)
    ## 
    ##   # Now
    ##   across(a:b, \(x) mean(x, na.rm = TRUE))

``` r
kable(top_drops)
```

| zip_code | borough | neighborhood | jan_2020 | jan_2021 | price_drop | percent_drop |
|---:|:---|:---|---:|---:|---:|---:|
| 10007 | Manhattan | Lower Manhattan | 6334.21 | 5421.61 | -912.60 | -14.41 |
| 10009 | Manhattan | Lower East Side | 3406.44 | 2692.19 | -714.25 | -20.97 |
| 10016 | Manhattan | Gramercy Park and Murray Hill | 3731.14 | 3019.43 | -711.70 | -19.07 |
| 10001 | Manhattan | Chelsea and Clinton | 4108.10 | 3397.65 | -710.45 | -17.29 |
| 10002 | Manhattan | Lower East Side | 3645.42 | 2935.11 | -710.30 | -19.48 |
| 10004 | Manhattan | Lower Manhattan | 3149.66 | 2443.70 | -705.96 | -22.41 |
| 10038 | Manhattan | Lower Manhattan | 3573.20 | 2875.62 | -697.59 | -19.52 |
| 10012 | Manhattan | Greenwich Village and Soho | 3628.57 | 2942.34 | -686.22 | -18.91 |
| 10010 | Manhattan | Gramercy Park and Murray Hill | 3697.28 | 3012.35 | -684.93 | -18.53 |
| 10003 | Manhattan | Lower East Side | 3569.78 | 2897.24 | -672.54 | -18.84 |

Total observations: 17516 Unique neighborhoods: 43 Unique zip codes: 149
